## Introvert-friendly Practices

This is a notes document where I'll jot down some practices that I think are introvert-friendly. At this point, it's mostly observations from the unconference I just attended, which I think did a good job. I may have forgotten some already, so I'll probably add to this when the plus, minus, delta notes from the conference go up.

* Solicit topics just before the conference. Don't ask too far in advance because you want them to be fresh and relevant, but don't leave it to the first day to completely come up with a range of things to discuss. Getting them just before the meetup gives everyone a chance to think about what they're looking for from the conference and what they can contribute. This gives introverts time to mull it over outside the rush of the first moments of the conference.
* The unconference wranglers then went through the audience and had everyone pick their top three from the consolidated list of potential topics. I'm not keen on mandatory participation, but this is a very simple task so I think it's fine in this case, and folks are picking from topics they've submitted (so it's not necessarily new information). In general, I like this metered approach to getting feedback. It's not as freewheeling as just opening the floor and letting people speak their minds but because of that it's friendlier to introverts who may have trouble getting their voices into a quickly moving discussion. Not everything should be this way, of course; part of the charm of unconferences are their rapid and lively discussions but I think providing space for both types of input is valuable.
* Someone suggested at the unconference wrapup that people could be prompted to bring something they've been working on to demo. The concern from the organizers was that they weren't sure about mandatory participation (which I completely agree with), but I think in this case this is a good idea. One of the neat things about unconferences are their participatory nature. I think giving people the heads up that it's encouraged, but not required, to share their experiences is good. I know I definitely would have come up with something to talk about given the space and opportunity for that. As an introvert, I'd also be more likely to do that if I was given notice ahead of time that that opportunity would be there. I'd be much less likely to do it on-the-fly. Since unconferences can vary so much in their formatting, one doesn't really know what to expect when attending. Being explicit that that sort of opportunity will exist is a good thing, I think.
* Some of the breakouts started with going around and having people talk about their experiences or interests on the topic to be discussed. I think you can make this not-mandatory but stating up-front that it's okay to be there because you are interested in learning more (vs. have some experience to contribute). Some of the breakouts I attended at this conference I had no experience with. I was there because I wanted to learn more. One could explain why they are interested in learning more (how they think the discussion is relevant to issues they experience in their work), but that's optional, I think. There were other breakouts where I did have some experience. Typical to my introvert nature, I wasn't very happy with what I said (felt I could have described the situation and our solutions better), but I think that's something introverts need to learn to do -- either be comfortable with our words or speak up again to clarify them. The problem is finding the relevant space in the ongoing discussion to do that.
* Provide spaces in the conversation for silence. The unconference wranglers several times provided moments of silence to give folks the opportunity to speak up. Perhaps in extrovert fashion, these moments were a bit strained, with a (non)verbal countdown of sorts, but I sympathized with this... knowing extroverts may be uncomfortable with moments silence sort of like introverts have a hard time finding the space to jump into the conversation. At the unconference, I'd say these moments of silence were a bit too short for an introvert to formulate a comment and jump in ("Oh look, a pause, let me think of something to say now"), but I'd still give the organizers points for the recognition that this sort of thing is important. 
* Breaks. And some longer breaks? I'm mixed on this. I found my own pattern for the unconference was to chat more at the breaks earlier on, but as the unconference rolls on I lean more towards time alone during the breaks. Maybe that's a good thing. Introverts, I think, need recouperation time from interactions. I worry that that time compounds, though, so maybe being less chatty as the unconference goes on is a good thing (in that it's providing recouperation for better engagement in the ongoing group discussions) or maybe it's a bad thing in that it's an indicator that the introvert has reached a limit and is just grasping for quiet time. We did have one longer 20 minute break where I went out for a brief walk and I felt much better after coming back from that than I did just sitting at my computer for a 10 minute break. Maybe this is a note to introverts to get out and stretch your legs when the longer breaks allow for this.
* All these suggestions aren't meant to tamp down the lively atmosphere of an unconference. I get the sense that extroverts really like and thrive on that sort of environment. I think unconferences were really created by extroverts because it's the sort of thing they enjoy. Perhaps one could even question whether extroverts want to make space for introverts. It does change the nature of the event some. I did attend one unconference where the organizer at the end did the usual "We want people to speak up more" and then said something to the effect, "if you don't have something to contribute perhaps this isn't the conference for you." When I heard that I was floored. And, I must admit, I left that unconference thinking it wasn't the conference for me. Not because I hadn't enjoyed the conference, but because I didn't really feel welcome at it. I think maybe one of the things this document should attempt to capture is what is engagement and participation. You may get someone who doesn't talk a lot but is willing to do the work that helps move the group forward. Or maybe introverts should think about participating by taking notes (that's always something few people seem to want to do). Or writing up something after the meeting that furthers the discussion (on a mailing list, blog, twitter, etc.) This in addition to contributing vocally when they choose to.
* At the end of the unconference there was some discussion related to group size. I think the smaller size was more introvert-friendly. Someone commented that if the group got larger it would be the same percentage of people speaking (so a larger number of non-speakers). Just to interject here, I think everyone spoke up at this unconference; it's just that most of the conversations involved the same group of people speaking up the most. I wonder if anything has been written about introvert comfort related to group size. That might be something worth investigating.
